[MUSIC]
>> Douglas: HTML was not state of the art
when it was introduced in the late 20th
century.
It was intended for simple document
viewers it was not intended to be
an application delivery platform.
We insisted on using it as an application
delivery platform because we needed one
and that was the best thing available,
so we used it.
But it was not well suited
to what we wanted to do.
A lot of people looked at
it in the beginning and
thought it didn't have what it takes,
and they were right.
But we went ahead and did it anyway.
So since then, the web standards were
grown from a naive hypertext system
under intense highly unstable
competitive pressure.
As Netscape and Microsoft attempted to
destroy each other by manipulating web
standards and it wasn't designed
to do all of this Ajax stuff.
Its success is due to a lot of very
clever people who found ways to make it
work despite its design limitations.
HTML was a huge improvement over SGML.
Primarily in that it was much a simpler
anytime you take something that's
too complex and
turn into something it's simple,
get generally are making it better.
Unfortunately, they also
made it more resilient.
One of the rules in SGML was if
you don't recognize the tag then
total failure, nothing happens and they
thought that was too much for the web.
So instead on the web,
the rule is if you see a tag and
you don't recognize it, ignore it and
keep parsing and it works.
And that's actually been good for the web
because it meant that we could upgrade.
We could have forward and backward
compatibility because the browsers would
be ignoring the differences as they
enter and leave the standards.
Unfortunately the dark side of that
is that there were, maybe still are,
incompetent web masters who
could not correctly write HTML.
And the browsers would do heroic
stuff to try to make sense
out of the stuff that they are writing.
Which turned into security exploits
which we'll talk about on the third day.
So the original formation of HTML
authors had virtually no
control over presentation.
And the thing didn't anticipate
applications beyond simple document
retrieval, which is a very small
part of what we're doing now.
It's not internally self-consistent.
For example,
it provides two ways of writing outlines
one is nested one is not,
it's not consistent.
And the thing that we call a web
page is not a page, it's a scroll.
I'm hoping someday we invent pages,
cuz pages are great.
Pages were a big step forward
in the march of civilization,
maybe someday the web
will catch up to that.
So the SGML community hated HTML,
they thought it was an abomination.
They did not like the way
it was simplified and
even more than that they did not like the
way it was so much more popular than SGML.
So eventually they took over W3C and
started changing things to
be more to their liking.
For example, they changed the way p
worked, p had originally been a separator,
they turned it into a container.
They started the thing
about semantic markup which
turned out to be a colossal waste of time
and they also created the XML Fiasco.
The idea was that they would create XML,
which would be the successor of SGML.
Which would be used as the new
document format replacing HTML and
be used as the world's data interchange
format, it failed at both of those things.
HTML it turned out refused to die and
it is still the web's document format and
the world's data interchange format is
Jason.
>> Speaker 2: But you said
you can talk about mythical semantics.
>> Douglas: Not, I am not
to be talking about semantic markup.
>> Speaker 2: Okay.
>> Douglas: You'll have to find someone
else to tell about that.
>> Speaker 2: No,
I'm curious as to why you.
>> Douglas: It didn't pay off,
we spent a lot of time on it and
didn't get anything for it.
>> Speaker 2: You know,
the only folks that we run into that
like it are people who have disabilities
who want the semantic markup to provide
some extra bit of information for
them.
>> Douglas: I have a lot of sympathy for
people with disabilities who
are trying to use the web,
I don't think that was the solution.
>> Douglas: But
I can understand being desperate enough
that compared to what the web delivers
that anything else might look
to be better than what you got.
I could talk about CSS, but
I just start ranting and
you don't need to hear me rant, do you?
Anyways it's just, so
it's talking to someone who's
finally gotten good at CSS I mean
it's hard to step up to CSS
is really hard and difficult.
Eventually designers get there and
once they've done it this Stockholm
thing seems to happen to them.
And it's kind of like watching
a domestic dispute on cops.
CSS isn't bad, you just don't understand
it like I do, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Anyway if all there was
to the web was HTML and
CSS, it would have been replaced by now.
The web would be gone and
we would be working on something else and
this is the proof of that.
George Colony, the Chairman and
CEO of Forrester Research was saying,
Another software technology
will come along and
kill off the Web,
just as it killed News, Gopher, et al.
And that judgment day will arrive very
soon, in the next two to three years.
So he was predicting in 2000,
that by 2003,
the web would be dead, replaced by
what he called the X Internet, which
was an app that the executable Internet,
it was an application delivery system.
That he thought that the web was
deficient because all it could do
was dispense documents and
that is not what the world needed.
This quote is no longer
on the Forrester website.
>> Speaker 2: [LAUGH]
>> Douglas: Archive.org has it though.
You can go to archive.org,
it's right there.
So a lot of people heard this message,
a lot of people believed
it including Microsoft.
So when Netscape self destructed,
Microsoft said good.
We didn't want the web in the first place,
so they disbanded the IE team and
put them to work on the X Internet.
So, they started up the dot net project,
they put people on Avalon,
they got moving on that stuff.
So, the surprise was
that the web didn't die,
and the reason it didn't die
was because of JavaScript.
That what Colony was arguing for
correctly was that the world needed
an application delivery system.
The thing he didn't
recognize was that the web
already was one because JavaScript
was in all the browsers.
Now Java community,
remembers this differently.
The Java community is really
angry at JavaScript for
being in the browser and
thinks it's completely unfair
that JavaScript was
the language in the browser.
Had Java been in the browser
things would have been different,
except that's not the way it was.
Java was the first language in
the browser and Java applets failed.
Java applets were the biggest
failure in the history of software.
A total out there in public,
huge scale, flat on your face,
the biggest failure we've ever
seen in software was Java applets.
They were supposed to write once and
run everywhere and do everything and
they didn't, total failure.
On the other hand,
the browser is still in existence
because JavaScript was there to save it.
So a lot of people who used or
everybody hates JavaScript.
There are people who don't know JavaScript
who hate it because they should know it.
The people who do use JavaScript and
hate it, actually hate the DOM.
The DOM is the API that the browser
presents to JavaScript and
it is one of the worst APIs ever invented.
It's just really awful, it was designed
also by Brendan Eich, he designed at
the same week that he designed JavaScript.
>> Speaker 2: [LAUGH] Busy week.
>> Douglas: It was a busy week,
he was handed Danny Goodman's HyperCard
pile which is a book, that's two or
three inches thick about HyperCard.
He never used HyperCard, never used
a scripting system, very smart guy,
very quick study.
He read the book very quickly,
and thought he got a sense of it,
how do you apply the HyperCard
model to the browser.
And he came up with the DOM and
it's just awful, it's just awful.
There have been many other people
over the years who have improved it.
For example one of the most important
contributions was Scott Isaacs
of Microsoft.
He was on the IE 14 and
he looked at the very peculiar model
that Netscape had came up with,
and normalized it in a really good way.
In the original Netscape model,
not all elements were scriptable, and
those that were scriptable
were only scriptable in
a way that matched what
was in the HyperCard book.
And as it said,
let's make them all work the same way
which made dumb programming
significantly easier.
But they never finished the reason
they never finished was because
Forrester said it's done.
So this is okay and they were all
put on other projects and after IE6,
it was just left and I was into the story.
So they knew it wasn't finished they
never intended to leave it at that state,
it's just what was done.
So they would often did other things,
as a result it's incomplete API
that's at the wrong level of abstraction
that's just horrible to use.